Paper: A Real-Time 3D Audio Simulator for Cognitive Hearing Science (#481)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/mark_wickert/mark_wickert.rst

:author: Mark Wickert
:email: mwickert@uccs.edu
:institution: University of Colorado Colorado Springs

:video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhRUe-gz690

------------------------------------------------------------
A Real-Time 3D Audio Simulator for Cognitive Hearing Science
------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

   This paper describes the development of a 3D audio simulator for use in cognitive hearing science 

>    studies and also for general 3D audio experimentation. The framework that the simulator is build 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   studies and also for general 3D audio experimentation. The framework that the simulator is built 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

Reviewer: (I think this change didn't make it in)

   upon is :code:`pyaudio_helper`, which is a module of the package :code:`scikit-dsp-comm`. The simulator runs in 
   a Jupyter notebook and makes use of Jupyter widgets for interactive control of audio source 
   positioning in 3D space. 3D audio has application in virtual reality and in hearing assistive 
   devices (HAD) research and development. At its core the simulator uses digital filters to represent the 
   sound pressure wave propagation path from the sound source to each ear canal of a human subject. 
   Digital filters of 200 coefficients each for left and right ears are stored in a look-up table 

>    as a function of azimuth and elevation angles of the impinging sounds source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   as a function of azimuth and elevation angles of the impinging sound's source.
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

.. class:: keywords

   Head-related impulse response (HRIR), Head-related transfer function (HRTF), binaural hearing, 
   virtual reality, audiology, hearing assistive devices (HAD), 

Introduction
------------

In cognitive hearing science binaural hearing models how sound pressure waves arrive at either 
ear drum, at the end of the ear canal, or in the case of typical measurements, at the entry 
to the ear canal, both as a function of the arrival angle in 3D (azimuth and elevation) and 
radial distance. This leads to the need for the head related impulse response (HRIR) 
(time-domain) or head-related transfer function (HRTF) (frequency domain) for a particular 
human subject. 
Traditionally human subjects are placed in an anechoic chamber with a sound 

> source placed at say one meter from the head and then the subject is moved over a range of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source placed at e.g. one meter from the head and then the subject is moved over a range of 
```
"say" sounds too informal

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

Author: @stargaser

I have done many small pushes, but the last one for tonight address the general comments by including a link to the HCI tutorial at UC-Davis that you have mentioned. The reference in in the introduction.

I still want to comment further on your general comments. You are correct that the HRTF/HRIR is a function of the subjects anthropometry. Our cognitive ability to localize sound is a learning process since birth. The main contribution of this paper is the apparatus for allowing human subjects to easily be evaluated for an HRFT/HRIR "fit". I am excited to move to this step in the research, but I have yet to experience this in a true clinical setting. I will have this running as a demo at the poster session.

azimuth and elevation angles, with the HRIR measured at each angle. The 3D simulator described 
here uses a database of HRIR's from the University of California, Davis, originally in the Center 
for Image Processing and Integrated Computing (CIPIC), [CIPICHRTF]_, to describe a given subject. 
In the :code:`pyaudio_helper` application 
the HRIR at a given angle is represented by two (left and right ear)  200 coefficient digital 
filters that the sound source audio is passed through. Here the data base for each subject  
holds 25 azimuth and 50 elevation angles to approximate continuous sound source 3D locations. 

Obtaining individual HRTFs is a challenge in itself and the subject of much research. In a related 
research project *deep learning* is being investigated as a means to fit a human subject to the CIPIC HRTF 
database of subjects, based on 27 upper torso anthropometrics (measurements) of the subject. As a simple solution, 
we can also consider using a simple spherical head model, and its corresponding HRTF, which 
makes use of spherical harmonics to solve for the sound pressure magnitude and phase at any location on the sphere 

> surface. A frequency sweep of magnitude and phase is then the inverse Fourier transformed to obtain the HRIR. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
surface. A frequency sweep of magnitude and phase is then inverse Fourier transformed to obtain the HRIR. 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

The ultimate intent of the simulator is to serve as a clinical tool for blind sound source localization experiments. 
Human subjects will be exposed to several different HRIR models, where at least one model is a *personalized 
fit* based on deep learning using anthropometrics and/or a finite element wave equation solution using a 3D 

> rendering of the subjects shoulders and head. Note 3D rendering of a subject can be obtained using *photogrammetry*, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rendering of the subject's shoulders and head. 3D rendering of a subject can be obtained using *photogrammetry*, 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

which estimates three-dimensional coordinates of points on an object from a collection of photographic images taken from 
different positions.

3D Geometry
===========

To produce a synthesized 3D audio sound field, we start with a geometry where the center of the coordinate frame is 

> the intersection between the subjects  *mid-sagittal* or vertical *median plane* and the line 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the intersection between the subject's  *mid-sagittal* or vertical *median plane* and the line 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:26 MDT push.

connecting the left and right ear canals. This is referred to as being *head-centered*. The coordinate 
systems used in this paper are shown in Figure :ref:`CYLIND`. 
The primary head-centered system has cartesian coordinates labeled :math:`(x,y,z)` and associated cylindrical 
coordinates :math:`(r_{xy},\phi_\text{az},h_y)` (black labels in Figure :ref:`CYLIND`). The cylindrical coordinates 
will be used in Jupyter notebook apps presented later as the interface for GUI controls to conveniently position 

> the audio source about a subjects head. A secondary head-centered 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the audio source about a subject's head. A secondary head-centered 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:26 MDT push.

system, used by CIPIC, has cartesian coordinates labeled :math:`(x_1,x_2,x_3)` and associated spherical 
coordinates :math:`(r,\phi,\theta)` (purple labels in Figure :ref:`CYLIND`).  The first coordinate system 
is motivated by [Fitzpatrick], and its usage is explained in detail in the section 
FIR Filter Coefficient Set Selection. The second system is referred to by CIPIC as the 
*interaural-polar coordinate system* (IPCS), which is used to index into the HRIR filter pairs which 
produce the right and left audio outputs.

.. figure:: 3D_Coordinates.pdf
   :scale: 50%
   :align: center
   :figclass: htb

   The primary head-centered coordinate system, :math:`(x,y,z)`, used in the 3D audio simulator, along with the 
   secondary system, :math:`(x_1,x_2,x_3)` used by CIPIC via IPCS and spherical coordinates :math:`(r,\phi,\theta)`. :label:`CYLIND`

The 3D audio rendering provided by the simulator developed in this paper relies on the 1250 
HRIR measurements taken using the geometrical configuration shown in Figure :ref:`CIPICLOC`. 

> A total of 45 subjects are contained in the CIPIC HRIR database, both human and the mannequin *Kemar* [CIPICHRTF]_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A total of 45 subjects are contained in the CIPIC HRIR database, both human and the mannequin KEMAR (Knowles Electronics Manikin for Auditory Research) [CIPICHRTF]_. 
```
(optional to spell out the acronym -- I would find it helpful)

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

two binaural cues, *interaural level difference* ILD and *interaural time difference* ITD, that are used for 
accurate localization of a sound source. With :math:`\phi_{az} = 130^\circ` we see as expected, the impulse 
response for the right ear arriving ahead of the left ear response, and with greater amplitude.

.. figure:: CIPIC_Source_Locations.pdf
   :scale: 60%
   :align: center
   :figclass: htb

   The CIPIC audio source locations, effectively on a 1 m radius sphere, used to obtain 1250 HRIR measurements 
   for each of 45 subjects (only the right hemisphere locations shown). :label:`CIPICLOC`
 

.. figure:: HRIR_example.pdf
   :scale: 50%
   :align: center
   :figclass: htb

   Example right/left HRIR plots for a particular arrival angle pulled from CIPIC for subject 165. :label:`HRIR`

Real-Time Signal Processing
===========================

In this section we briefly describe the role real-time digital signal processing (DSP) plays in implementing 
the 3D audio simulator. A top level block diagram of the 3D audio simulator is shown in Figure :ref:`FILTERING`. 

> From the block diagram we see that for audio source is positioned at :math:`(x,y,z)` relative to the head 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an audio source positioned at :math:`(x,y,z)` relative to the head 
```
I found the phrase "From the block diagram we see that..." confusing, because the filter coefficients, the gain scaling, the parallax, etc. are not in Figure 4 at all.

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:26 MDT push. Your comment about being confusing is good. I added this figure after the first review, because yes I think the parallax correction needs some explaining in this paper, without forcing the reader to jump to the Fitzpatrick reference. Again thanks helping me make this clearer.

center, the appropriate HRIR right and left channel digital filter coefficients are utilized along with gain scaling 
to account for radial distance relative to 1 m and a parallax correction factor. Gain scaling and parallax 
correction, are taken from [Fitzpatrick]_, and are explained in more detail in the following section of this paper.

To implement the filtering action we use the :code:`pyaudio_helper` framework 
[Wickert]_ of Figure :ref:`PAH`, which interfaces to the audio subsystem of a personal computer. The 
framework supports real-time signal processing, in particular filtering using core signal 
processing functions of :code:`scipy.signal` [ScipySignal]_. The 200 coefficients of the right and left HRIR 
are equivalent to the coefficients in a finite impulse response (FIR) digital filter which produce a discrete-time 
output signal or sequence :math:`y_R[n]/y_L[n]` from a single audio source signal :math:`x[n]`. All of the signals 

> are processed with at a sampling rate of :math:`f_s = 44.1` ksps, as this is rate used in forming the CIPIC 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are processed with a sampling rate of :math:`f_s = 44.1` kHz, as this is rate used in forming the CIPIC 
```
I couldn't parse "ksps" and I wonder if "kcps" (kilo cycles per second) was intended. Later in the paper I see 44.1 kHz so I suggest it here.

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:26 MDT push. The ksps is an abbreviation for kilo samples per second, you are correct in that just saying 44.1 kHz is consistent with the other reference to the sampling rate. Thanks for noticing this.

For the more typical case of the source range, :math:`r = \sqrt{x^2 + y^2 + z^2} \neq 1`, more 
processing is required. The approach taken here follows [Fitzpatrick]_ using the primary cartesian 
coordinates to additionally perform *parallax* correction and source range amplitude correction. Source 
range correction accounts for the fact that with a point source we have sound wave divergence, thus 
the amplitude needs to be scaled inversely with radial distance (inverse-squared in the sound 
intensity sense). The inverse distance correction is for each ear and takes into account the fact 
that the entry to the ear canal is offset from the head center by the mean head radius :math:`R`. The 
second correction factor is *parallax*, which is graphically depicted in Figure :ref:`PARALLAX` for the 
special case of a source in the horizontal plane and directly in front of the head. Both 
corrections are addressed in detail in [Fitzpatrick]_. For a source not on the unit sphere, 
sound parallax requires an adjustment in the HRIR coefficients, unique to the right and left ears. 
If we extend rays from the right and left ears that pass through the sound source location and then 

> touch the unit sphere, the required azimuth values will be shifted to locations either side of the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
touch the unit sphere, the required azimuth values will be shifted to locations on either side of the 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:26 MDT push.

true source azimuth. The corresponding HRIR values where these rays contact the unit sphere, 
respectively, perform the needed parallax correction. The actual database entries utilized are those 

> that are closest to the intersection point   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that are closest to the intersection points.
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

      self.coeffL = self.hrirL[self.AzL_idx,
                               self.ElRL_idx,:]

In the :code:`__init__` method all the right left filter coefficients for the chosen subject database entry 
are copied into class attributes and look-up tables (LUTs) are populated in terms of IPCS angles to ease 
selecting the needed right/left filters. The sound wave amplitude correction factors :code:`self.tR` and 
:code:`tL` are obtained from the parallax correction expression in [Fitzpatrick]_, and double as the 
required range scale factors, :math:`G_R` and :math:`G_L` in (1) and (2). 

3D Audio Simulator Notebook Apps
--------------------------------

For human subject testing and general audio virtual reality experiments, two applications (apps) that 
run in the Jupyter notebook were created. The first allows the user to *statically* 
locate an audio source in space, while the second creates a *time-varying motion* audio source. 
For human subject tests the static source is of primary interest. Both apps have a GUI slider interface 
that use the cylindrical coordinates described in Figure :ref:`CYLIND` to control the position the source.

Static Sound Source
===================

> The first and foremost purpose the 3D audio simulator is to to be able statically position an audio source 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first and foremost purpose the 3D audio simulator is to be able to statically position an audio source 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

   \tilde{p}(r,\theta_i) &=& \tilde{p}_I(r,\theta_i) + \tilde{p}_s(r,\theta_i) \nonumber \\
   &=& \sum_{n=0}^\infty (-j)^n (2n+1) P_n(\cos\theta_i)  \nonumber \\
   && \cdot \left[j_n(kr) - 
   \frac{j_n^\prime(kR)}{h_n^{\prime(2)}(kR)} h_n^{(2)}(kr)\right]

where :math:`j_n^\prime(x)` the spherical Bessel function of the first kind derivative, 
:math:`h_n^{(2)}(kr)` is the :math:`n\text{th-order}` spherical Hankel function of the second kind 
and :math:`h_n^{\prime(2)}(kr)` is the corresponding derivative. Figure :ref:`SCATTER` shows the 
pressure magnitude at 2000 Hz for :math:`R = 8.75\text{ cm}`, for the plane wave traveling along the 
:math:`+z-\text{axis}`. The second plot coordinate, due to axial symmetry, is :math:`w= \sqrt{x^2+y^2}`. 
Note in the spherical coordinates of the math model, it remains that :math:`r = \sqrt{w^2+z^2}` and 
:math:`\cos\theta_i = z/\sqrt{w^2 + z^2}`.

.. figure:: SphericalHeadScattering.pdf
   :scale: 50%
   :align: center
   :figclass: htb

   Using spherical harmonics [Beranek]_ to calculate the pressure wave magnitude (shown here) and 
   phase, using a plane wave audio source arriving from the bottom of the figure. :label:`SCATTER`

> The calculations required to obtain Figure :label:`SCATTER` follow easily using the functions found in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calculations required to obtain Figure :ref:`SCATTER` follow easily using the functions found in 
```

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push.

   :math:`h_R[n]` and :math:`h_L[n]`, starting from CIPIC source angles, :math:`(\theta_\text{CIPIC}, \phi_\text{CIPIC})`, 
   ear canal set-back angles, :math:`(\phi_R, \phi_L)`, and the sphere radius :math:`R`. :label:`HRIRCALCBLOCK`

Finally putting this all together, code was written in a Jupyter notebook to generate a CIPIC-like database entry, 
using :code:`scipy.io` to write a MATLAB :code:`mat` file, e.g., :code:`subject_200` is a 
spherical head, with no ears (pinna), containing two HRIR arrays:

.. code-block:: python

   io.whosmat('subject_200/hrir_final.mat')

   [('hrir_l', (25, 50, 200), 'double'), 
    ('hrir_r', (25, 50, 200), 'double')]
 
An example HRIR plot, similar to Figure :ref:`HRIR`, is shown in Figure :ref:`HRIR875`. 

.. figure:: HRIR_example_sphere_R875.pdf
   :scale: 50%
   :align: center
   :figclass: htb

   Example right/left HRIR plots for a particular arrival angle pulled from the CIPIC-like database entry created 
   for a radius 8.75 cm sphere. :label:`HRIR875`

Casual listening tests with a coarse fit human subject from CIPIC and the simple spherical model, indicate both similarities 

> and differences. Coarse localization is similar between the two, bit the spherical model seems *sterile*. The fact that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and differences. Coarse localization is similar between the two, but the spherical model seems *sterile*. The fact that 
```
I haven't encountered "sterile" used to describe a model before. Does sterile mean the HRIR is mostly flat and lacks features that a measured HRIR typically contains?

Author: Applied in 6/30/2019 10:15 MDT push. Also added short phrase describing what is meant by sterile.

What remains is to respond to the general comments.

      self.coeffL = self.hrirL[self.AzL_idx,
                               self.ElRL_idx,:]

In the :code:`__init__` method all the right left filter coefficients for the chosen subject database entry 
are copied into class attributes and look-up tables (LUTs) are populated in terms of IPCS angles to ease 
selecting the needed right/left filters. The sound wave amplitude correction factors :code:`self.tR` and 
:code:`tL` are obtained from the parallax correction expression in [Fitzpatrick]_, and double as the 
required range scale factors, :math:`G_R` and :math:`G_L` in (1) and (2). 

3D Audio Simulator Notebook Apps
--------------------------------

For human subject testing and general audio virtual reality experiments, two applications (apps) that 
run in the Jupyter notebook were created. The first allows the user to *statically* 
locate an audio source in space, while the second creates a *time-varying motion* audio source. 
For human subject tests the static source is of primary interest. Both apps have a GUI slider interface 
that use the cylindrical coordinates described in Figure :ref:`CYLIND` to control the position the source.

Static Sound Source
===================

> The first and foremost purpose the 3D audio simulator is to be able to statically position an audio source 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first and foremost purpose of the 3D audio simulator is to be able to statically position an audio source 
```

Author: Done, will see in next push

and phase (angle) of the sinusoidal signal input 
to a system and in the numerator we have the magnitude and phase of the corresponding output signal 
(measurement point on the sphere or ultimately the ear canal). 
For the case of the HRTF the output is the sound pressure magnitude and phase at the entrance to 
the right and left ear canals. In the case of the CIPIC database the location of the source is at 
a particular azimuth and elevation on a 1 m sphere centered over the head. The HRTF of a sphere 
is defined more generally as the output can be any point on the surface of the sphere. The input 
location is generally at some distance :math:`r` from the center of the sphere. 

In [Duda]_ the HRTF is defined as the ratio of the sound pressure on the 
surface of the sphere divided by the pressure at the sphere center, given that the sphere *is not* 
present:  

.. math::
   :label: dudahrtf

   H(\theta_i, f, r, R) = \frac{r}{kR^2} e^{jkr} \sum_{n=0}^\infty (2n+1) P_n(\cos\theta_i) 
   \frac{h_n^{(2)}(kr)}{h_n^{\prime(2)}(kR)},\ r > R

where :math:`\theta_i` is the angle of incidence between the source and measurement point, 

> :math:`f` is the operating frequency in Hz, :math:`r` is the distance fro the source to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`f` is the operating frequency in Hz, :math:`r` is the distance from the source to the 
```

Author: Done, will see in next push

> center if the sphere, and one again :math:`R` is the sphere radius. Recall also that the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
center of the sphere, and once again :math:`R` is the sphere radius. Recall also that the 
```

Author: Done, will see in next push
